No holy rays from heaven come down
There open temples open graves
The wave there is a ripple there!
In the misty mid region of Weir -
Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
To shine on us with her bright eyes -
And I said - "What is written, sweet sister,
The blotting utterly from out high heaven
For the resurrection of deep-buried faith
But that you meddle with my fate
From the sun and stars, whence he had drawn forth
Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,
I saw thee half reclining; while the moon 
They fill my soul with Beauty (which is Hope), 
The Elfin from the green grass, and from me
Let us bathe in this crystalline light!
That high tone of the spirit which hath striven 
From the lightning in the sky
So wills its King, who hath forbid
From a cavern not very farAnd so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door, 
"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil! - prophet still, if bird or devil! 
Against whose portal she hath thrown,
No more -- like dew-drop from the grass:

Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
Swifter than the moon's sphere;
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Some beauty peep'd through lattice of sear'd age.
And often kiss'd, and often 'gan to tear:
Yet, if men moved him, was he such a storm
And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.
And now she would the caged cloister fly:
Ay me! I fell; and yet do question make
The boding raven, nor chough hoar,
His steeds to water at those springs
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room,
What follows more she murders with a kiss.
Ill-nurtured, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,
Or what great danger dwells upon my suit?
Sometime he scuds far off and there he stares;
O, give it me, lest thy hard heart do steel it,
Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.
The honey fee of parting tender'd is:
Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.

And having perhaps the better claim
So Eden sank to grief,
The hillside on the day the sun lets go
His lantern when he did his chores
Should take the polish off the crust.
When I can hurt someone by doing it
I made him do it for me in the dark.
A likeness to surprise the thrilly tourist.
By flying like a bird (silent in flight,
It's not men by some mistake?
Tell you what Ralle the Sioux Control once told me.
And swollen tight and buried under snow.
That's what I sit up in the dark to say-
Was only adding frost to snow
She made a sudden movement toward her bodice, 
Over descended from her. I believe 
In a new cottage on the ancient spot.
'Nowhere but here 
Moisture and color and odor thicken here.
Time someone came with cart and pair 